okay so first of all I have a terrible
confession to make this guy's is
actually being run not by me but by
these two guys
Alfredo kanjyani and Margo Stein who is
Neymar here the other TAS and you'll
talk to them much more than that you'll
talk to me that's the first thing the
other confession I have to make is that
if you have questions about this class
don't ask them at the end of this course
because I have to run right after the
class to catch an airplane but I can't
wait until next week okay so let's start
right in some very basic course
information there is a website as you
can see I will do what I can to post the
PDF of the slides on the website
probably just before the lecture
probably just a few minutes before the
lecture usually but but it should be
there by the time you you get to class
so at least by exam I get to class
there's going to be nine lectures that
I'm going to teach on Monday evenings
there is also a practical session every
Tuesday nights that further on mark will
be running so they'll go through some of
the you know practical questions some
you know refreshers on sort of math you
know mathematics are necessary for this
and basic concepts some tutorials on how
to use my torch and various other
software tools and that's going to be
three guest lectures the names of the
guest lecturer are not finalized but but
it's gonna be on topics like natural
language processing computer vision cell
supervisor learning things like that
there's going to be a midterm exam or at
least we think there is and it's going
to take one of those sessions you know
you run around March and the evaluation
will be done on the midterm and on a
final project and you can sort of you
know been in groups of two us a two or
three or just two
we didn't decide yet we'll see the
project will probably have to do with a
combination of supervised running and
autonomous driving we are discussing
with various people for data and things
like that okay let me talk a little bit
about so the this this first lecture is
really going to be sort of a broad
introduction about what deep running is
really and what you can do what you
cannot do so it will serve as an
introduction to the entire thing so
we'll go through the entire arc if you
want of the class but in a very
superficial term so that you get sort of
broad high-level idea of all the topics
we're talking about and whenever I'll
talk about its particular topic you'll
see where it fits in this kind of whole
picture but before that so there is a
prerequisite for the class which is you
know you need to be kind of familiar
with machine learning or at least basic
Constitution learning
who here has played with fighters
tensorflow has trained neural net ok who
is not done that so be shy ok ok so the
majority has which is good but I'm not
going to assume that you know everything
about this particularly am I going to
assume that you know a lot of the you
know sort of deep underlying techniques
ok so here is the course plan and
depending on what you tell me I can
address this and sort of you know go
faster on certain sections that you
think are too obvious because you've
played with this before or or other
things so so intro to supervisor on in
your honesty planning that's what I'm
going to talk about today what what deep
learning can do when you cannot do what
are good features deep learning is about
no new representations so now let's talk
about next week will be about back
propagation and basic architectural
components so things like the fact that
you build neural Nets out of modules and
you connect with each other the you
compute gradients you get automatic
differentiations and then these various
types of architectures loss functions
activation functions you know different
modules tricks like weight sharing and
we're tying market multiplicative
interactions attention gating things
like this right are there particular
macro architecture is like mixture of
Oxford Siamese net hyper networks make
sense right so we'll we'll dive pretty
quickly in and that's appropriate if
you've already played with some of those
things then there'll be either one or
two lectures I haven't completely
decided yet yet about commercial Nets
and their applications one of them might
end up being a guest lecture then more
specifically about deep learning
architectures that are useful in in
special cases things so things like
recurrent neural nets with back
propagation through time which is the
way you try and write current neural
nets and and sort of applications of
recurrent neural nets to things like
control and you know pretty think time
series and stuff like that then things
like combined recurrence and gating and
multiplicative interactions like get you
gated recurrent units and STM and then
things like really use multiplicative
interactions as kind of really a basis
of their architecture like memory
networks transformers adapters etc which
are sort of very recent architectures
that are becoming to be popular and
things like an LP and other other areas
and then a little bit about graph neural
nets which I'm not going to talk about
this a lot because there is another
course that you can take by John Brunner
where he spends a lot of time on graph
neural Nets then they will talk about
how we get those deep learning systems
to work and so various tricks to get
them to work sort of under understanding
the type of optimization that takes
place in neural nets so the type of you
know we we use of course learning is
always about almost always about
optimization and deep learning is almost
always about gradient based optimization
and there are certain rules about
optimization in convex in the convex
case that are well understood but
they're not well understood when the
training is stochastic which is the case
for most deep learning systems and
they're not very well understood also in
deep learning because the the cost
function is not is not convex
it has local minima and several points
and things like this so it's important
to understand the geometry of the
objective function
I say it's important to understand but
the the big secret here is that nobody
actually understands so it's important
to understand that nobody understands
okay but there are a few tricks that
have come up through a combination of
intuition and and a little bit of
theoretical analysis and empirical
search things like initialization tricks
normalization tricks and regularization
tricks like drop out grading grading
clipping is more for optimization things
like momentum average HDD pallet the
various methods for paralyzing HDD many
of which do not work and then something
a little exotic
called target pop and the Lagrangian
formulation of back part then I'll
switch to my favorite topic which is
energy based models so this is sort of a
general formulation of a lot of
different sort of approaches to learning
whether they are supervised unsupervised
have supervised and whether they involve
things like inference like you know
searching for the value of variables
that nobody tells you the value of but
that your process your system is
supposed to infer so that could be
thought of as sort of a way of
implementing reasoning with neural nets
so you could think of reasoning in
neural nets as a process by which you
have some energy function that's being
optimized with respect to some variables
and the value you get as a result of
this optimization is the value of those
variables you were trying to find and so
there is sort of the the common view
that a neural net is just a function
that computes its output as a function
of its input so you just run through the
neural net you get an output but that's
a fairly restrictive form of inference
in a sense that you can only produce
one output for a given input but very
often there are multiple possible
answers to a given input and so how do
you kind of represent problems of this
type where there are multiple answers
multiple possible answers to a given
input and one answer to this is you make
those answers the minima of some energy
function and your inference algorithm is
going to find values of those variables
that minimize this objective function
and there might be multiple minima so
that means you are your model might
produce multiple outputs for a given
input okay
so energy based models it's kind of a
way of doing this a special case all
those energy based models are
probabilistic models like you know
Bayesian methods graphical model
bridging nets and things like this
energy methods are a little more general
so a little less specific
so special cases of this include things
like people used to call structure
prediction and then there is a lot of
applications of this in what's called
supervised running and that would be the
topic of the next couple lectures so sub
supervised running is a very very active
topic of research today and probably
something that's going to become really
dominant in the future it's already in
the space of a year it's become dominant
in natural language processing and used
in the last few months just three months
there's been a few papers that show that
supervised running methods actually work
really well in things like computer
vision as well and so my guess my guess
is that supervised running is going to
take over the world in the next few
years so I think it's useful to hear
about it in this class so the things
like I'm not going to go through a
laundry list of this but there are
things that you may have heard of like
version of autoencoders denoising
auto-encoders
burt which is you know those transformer
architectures that are trained for
natural language processing that
transfer self supervised running and
there are special case of denoising
auto-encoder
so a lot of those things you may have
heard of without realizing they were all
kind of it can be all understood in the
context of this sort of energy based
approach and I think was also generated
by virtual networks which I'm sure many
of you have heard
and then there is a supervised learning
on beyond so you know how do we get
machines to really kind of become really
intelligent like they're not super
intelligent they're not very intelligent
right now they can solve very narrow
problems very well sometimes with
superhuman performance but no machine
has any kind of common sense and the
most intelligent machines that we have
probably as less common sense than a
housecat so how do we get to cat level
intelligence first and then maybe human
level intelligence and I don't pretend
to have the answer but I have you know a
few ideas that are interesting to
discuss in the context of supervised
running there I've had some applications
any question so that's the plan of your
course okay it might change dynamically
that is that's the intent any question
okay
yeah yeah there are assignments
right okay so follow-through viewed in
here Alfredo because you speak very
loudly there this the final project is
actually going to be a competition
between the teams so this could be like
a leaderboard and everything and in
preparation for this the assignments
will be basically practice to get
familiar with all the techniques that
you would need for deep running in
general but for the final project in
particular right also for midterm
obviously okay so also you probably know
that and this is gonna pretty boring for
some of you who've already played with
those things but but it start from the
basics deep learning is inspired by what
people have observed by the brain but
the inspiration is just an inspiration
it's not the attempt is not to copy the
brain because there's a lot of details
about the brain that are irrelevant and
that we don't know if they are relevant
actually to human intelligence so the
inspiration is at kind of a conceptual
level and it's a little bit the same as
you know airplanes be inspired by birds
but the underlying principles of flight
for birds and airplanes are essentially
the same but the details are extremely
different they both have wings the boat
generate drift by propelling themselves
to air but you know airplanes don't have
feathers and don't flap their wings so
it's a bit the same the same same idea
and the the history of this goes back to
a field that has kind of almost
disappeared or at least changed name now
called sovereign alex if you want a
specialist about the history of
cybernetics is sitting right there Joe
level in here raise your hand so Joe is
actually philosopher and he is
interested in the he actually has a
seminar on kind of the history of AI in
the what department this is media
culture and communication so Nazi s hmm
and he knows everything about you know
the history of cybernetics so it started
in the in the 40s with two gentlemen
McCulloch and Pitt's their picture is on
the top right here and they came up with
the idea that you know people at the
time or in you know interested in logic
but
neuroscience was a very sort of nascent
healed and they got the idea that if
neurons are are basically threshold
units that are on or off then by
connecting neurons with each other you
can build boolean circuits and you can
basically do logical inference with
neurons and so they say you know the
brain is basically a logical inference
machines machine because the the the
neurons are binary and this idea so the
idea was that a neuron computes a
weighted sum of its inputs and then
compares the weighted sum to a threshold
it turns on if it's what the threshold
turns off if it's if it's if it's below
which is sort of simplified view of how
real neurons work a very very simplified
you that model can is stuck with the
field for decades like almost four
decades actually
fool for decades then there was you know
quasi simultaneously Donald Hebb who had
the idea that neurons in the brain maybe
it's an old idea that the brain learns
by modifying the strength of the
connections between the between the
neurons that are called the synapses and
you had the idea of what's what's now
called hebbian learning which is that if
two neurons fire together then they're
the connection that links them increases
and if they don't fire together maybe it
decreases that's not an idea for
learning algorithm but it's sort of a
first idea perhaps and then cybernetics
was proposed by these guys Norbert
Wiener who is here and this is the whole
idea that by having systems that kind of
have sensors and can and have actuator
you can have like feedback loops and you
can have you know self-regulating
systems and what's the theory behind
this you know we sort of take that for
granted now but the idea that you know
you have things like kind of for example
mmm you know you drive your car right
you you turn the wheel and there's a so
called PID controller that actually
turns the wheel in in proportion to how
you turn the steering wheel
and it's a feedback mechanism that
basically measures the position of the
steering wheel measure the position of
the of the wheel of the car and then if
there is a difference between do to kind
of corrects the wheels of the car so
that they match the orientation steering
wheel that's a feedback mechanism that
the stability of this and the rules
about this are basically all come from
initially from from this work that led
to a gentleman by the name of Frank
Rosenblatt to basically imagine learning
algorithms that modified the weights of
very simple neural nets and what you see
here at the bottom the two pictures here
this is Frank Rosenblatt and this is the
perceptron this was a physical analog
computer it was not a three-line Python
program which is what it is now it was a
gigantic machine with you know wires and
optical sensors so you could show it
pictures it was very low resolution and
then it had it would you know we could
it had neurons that could compute a
weighted sum and the weights could be
adapted and the weights were
potentiometers potentiometers had motors
on them so they could rotate for the
learning algorithm so there was
electromechanical and what he's holding
here in this end is a module of eight
weights with you can count them with
those potentiometers motorized
potentiometers on them okay so there was
a little bit of history of where neural
nets come from another interesting piece
of history is that this whole idea of
sort of trying to build intelligent
machines by basically simulating
networks of neurons was born in the 40s
kind of took off a little bit in the
late 50s and completely died in the
1960s in the late 1960s when people
realized that with the kind of running
algorithms and architectures that people
were proposing at the time you can do
much you know you could do some basic
very simple pattern recognition but you
can do much so between 1969 roughly and
or 1968 and 1984 I would say basically
nobody in the world was working on
neural nets except a few kind of
isolated researchers mostly in Japan
because Japan is its own kind of
relatively isolated ecosystem for
funding research people don't listen to
the same kind of fashions if you want
and then they feel took off again in
1985 roughly with the emergence of back
propagation so back propagation is an
algorithm for training multi-layer
neural nets as you as many of you know
and people were looking for something
like this in the 60s and basically
didn't find it and the reason they
didn't find it was because they had the
wrong neurons they were using macular
pits neurons that are binary and the way
to get back propagation to work is to
use an activation function that is
continuous differentiable that is
continuous and and people just didn't
have the you know the idea of using
continuous neurons and so they didn't
think that you could train those systems
with gradient descent because things
were not differentiable now there's
another reason for this which is that if
you have a neural net with binary
neurons you never need to do you never
need to compute multiplications you
never need to multiply two numbers you
only need to add numbers right if your
neuron is active you just add the weight
to the weighted sum it is inactive you
don't do anything if you have continuous
neurons you need to multiply the
activation of a neuron by a way to get
to get a contribution to the weighted
sum it turns out before the 1980s
multiplying two numbers particularly
floating-point numbers on any sort of
non ridiculously expensive computer was
extremely slow and so there was an
incentive to not use continuous neurons
for that reason so the reason why back
frog didn't emerge earlier than the mid
80s is because that's when you know
computers became fast enough to do 14
point multiplications pretty much people
didn't think of it this way but that's
you know kind of read which was
effectively that's pretty much what
happened so there was a wave of interest
in neural nets between 1985 and 1995
lasted about 10 years in 1995 it died
again people in machine learning
basically abandon the idea of using
neural nets for reasons that I'm not
gonna go into right now and that lasted
until the late 2000 or 2010 so when
around 2009 2010 people realized that
you could use multi-layer neural Nets
training with back prop and get an
improvement for speech recognition it
didn't start with image net it started
with speech recognition around 2010 and
within 18 months of the first papers
being published on this every major
player in speech recognition had
deployed commercial speech recognition
systems that use neural nets so if you
had an Android phone and you were using
any other speech recognition features in
an Android phone around 2012 that used
neural net that was probably the first
really really wide deployment of kind of
modern forms of deep learning if you
want then into at the end of 2012 2013
the same thing happened in computer
vision where the computer vision
community realize deep learning
coordinates in particular work much
better than whatever it is that they
were using before and started to switch
using commercial nets and basically
abandon all previous techniques so that
created a second revolution now in
computer vision and then three years
later around 2016 or so the same thing
happened in natural language processing
in language translation and things like
this 2015-16 and now we're going to see
it's not happened yet but we're going to
see the same revolution occur in things
like robotics and control and you know a
whole bunch of application areas but let
me get to this okay so you all know what
supervised running is I'm sure and this
is really what the vast majority and not
the vast majority like 90 some percent
applications of deep learning use
supervised running as kind of the main
the main thing so supervised running is
the process by which you collect a bunch
of pairs of inputs and outputs of
examples of let's say images together
with a category if you want to do image
recognition or a bunch of audio clips
with there
transcription a bunch of text in one
language with the transcription in other
language etc and you feed one example to
the machine it produces an output if the
output is correct you don't do anything
or you don't do much if the output is
incorrect then you tweak the parameters
of the machine think of it as a
parametrized a function of some kind and
you tweak the parameters of that
function in such a way that the output
gets closer to the when you want okay
this is a non technical term with
supervised learning is all about so show
a picture of a car if the system doesn't
say cars with the parameters the
parameters in the neural net are going
to be the weights on the you know that
compute weighted sums in in those
simulated neurons tweak the knobs so
that the output gets closer to the when
you won the trick in neural nets is how
do you figure out in which direction
about how much to tweak the knobs so
that the output gets closer to the one
you want
that's what gradient competition and
back propagation is about but before we
get to this a little bit little bit of
history again so there was a flurry of
models basic models for classification
you know starting with a perceptron
there was another competing model called
the ADA line which is on the top right
here they based on the same kind of
basic architecture it's computer
weighted sum of inputs compared to a
threshold if it's above the threshold
turn on if it's below the threshold turn
off what you see the the the other line
here the the thing that Bernie Widow is
tweet is tweaking is actually a physical
analog computer again so it's like like
like the perceptron it was much less you
know much smaller in many ways and the
reason and tell you about this is that
the the perception actually was a two
layer neural net a two layer neural net
in which the second layer was trainable
with adaptive weights but the first
layer was fixed in fact most of the time
with most experiments it was it was it
was determined randomly you would like
randomly connect input pixels of an
image to neurons that would you know be
threshold neurons with random weights
essentially
this is what they call the associative
layer and that basically became the
basis for the sort of conceptual design
of a pattern recognition system for the
next four decades I want to say four
decades yeah pretty much so so that
model is one by which you you take an
input you run it through a feature
extractor that it's supposed to extract
the relevant characteristics of the
input that will be useful for the task
so you want to recognize a face can you
detect an eye how do you detect an eye
well there is probably a dark circle
somewhere things like that right you
want to recognize a car you know all
they are kind of dark round things etc
so the problem here and so what this
feature extractor produces is a vector
of features which are things that may be
numbers or they may be on or off okay so
it's just a list of numbers a vector and
you're going to feed that vector to
trainable classifier in the case of
perceptron or simple neural net it's
gonna be just the system that computes a
weighted sum compares it to a threshold
and the problem is that you have to
engineer the feature extractor so the
entire literature of pattern recognition
senses equal pattern recognition at
least and a lot of computer vision at
least the part of computer vision that's
interested in recognition was focused on
this part the feature extractor how do
you design a feature extractor for a
particular problem you want to do I
don't know how Google character
recognition what are the relevant
features for recognizing on Google and
how can you extract them using all kinds
of algorithmic tricks how do you process
the images you know how do you normalize
their size you know things like that
are you skeletonize them and you segment
them from the background so the entire
literature was devoted to this very very
little was devoted to that
and what we're deepening brought to the
table is this idea that instead of
having this kind of two-stage process
for pattern recognition where one stage
is built by hand where the
representation of the input is the
result of you know some hand engineered
program essentially the idea of deep
learning is that you learn the entire
task end-to-end ok so basically you
build your pattern recognition system or
whatever it is that you want to do with
it
as a cascade or a sequence of modules
all of those modules have tunable
parameters all of them have some sort of
non-linearity in them ok and then you
stack them you stack multiple layers of
them which is why it's called deep
pruning so the only reason for the deep
world and deep learning is the fact that
there are multiple layers is nothing
more to that ok and then you train the
entire thing end-to-end
so the complication here of course is
the fact that the parameters are on the
first box how do you know how to turn
them so that the output does you know
goes closer to the output you want
that's that's what back propagation does
for you ok why do all those modules have
to be nonlinear it's because if you have
to to successive modules and they're
both linear you can collapse them into a
single linear right the product of two
linear functions or the composition of
two linear functions is a linear
function take a vector x matrix and
multiply it by the second matrix it's as
if you're pre computed the product of
those two matrices and then multiply the
input vector by that composite matrix so
there's no point having multiple layers
if those layers are linear ok it's
actually a point but it's a manual point
so since they have to be nonlinear what
is the simplest multi-layer architecture
you can imagine that has parameters that
you can tune things like weights in the
neural nets and is nonlinear
and your eyes quickly that it has to
look something like this so take an
input an input can be represented as a
vector right an image is just a list of
numbers think of it as a vector you know
the fact that it's an image for now
piece of audio whatever it is that your
your sensors or your data set gives you
is a vector multiply this vector by
matrix the coefficients in this matrix
are the tunable parameters and then take
the resulting vector right when you
multiply a matrix by a vector you get a
vector pass each component of this
vector through a a nonlinear function
and if you want to have the simple as
possible nonlinear function use
something like what's shown at the top
here which people in the in your let's
call the value people in engineering
call this half wave rectification people
in math call this positive part whatever
you want to call it okay so apply this
nonlinear function to every component of
the vector that result from multiplying
the input vector by the matrix okay now
you get a new vector which has lots of
zeros in it because whenever the widget
song was less than zero yet which is
zero if you pass through the value and
then repeat the process take that vector
x weight matrix pass a result through
point wise non-linearity
take the result pass it multiplied by a
matrix that's a result through
nonlinearities that's a basic neural net
essentially okay now why is that called
a neural net at all it's because when
you take a vector and you multiply a
vector by a matrix to compute each
component of the output you actually
compute a weighted sum of the components
of the input by a corresponding row in
the matrix right so this little symbol
here there's a bunch of components of
the vector coming into this layer and
you take a row of the matrix computer
with a weighted sum of those values
where the weights are the
the values in the row that matrix and
that gives you a weighted sum and you do
this for every row that gives you the
result right so the number of units
after the multiplication by a matrix is
going to be equal to the number of rows
of your matrix and the number of columns
of the matrix of course has to be equal
to the size of the input
okay so supervised running in strategy
more formal terms and when I showed
earlier is really by which you're going
to compare the output that the system
produces so right you should input you
run through the neural net you get an
output you're going to compare this
output with a target output and you can
have an objective function a loss module
that computes a distance a discrepancy
penalty whatever you want to call it
divergence
okay there's various names for it and
then you're going to compute the average
of of that so that the output of this
cost function is a scalar right you
computes the distance for example
Euclidean distance between a target
vector and the vector that there's no
one that produces the d-plan you put
system produces and then you can compute
the average of this cost function which
is just a scalar you got into average it
over a training set right so a training
set is composed of a bunch of pairs of
inputs and outputs compute the average
of this over the training set the
function you want to minimize with
respect to the parameters of the system
the dribble knobs is that average okay
so you want to find the value of the
parameters that minimizes the average
error between the output you want and
yeah I put you get averaged over a
training set of samples
so I'm sure you know the vast majority
of people here sort of have a case of
intuitive understanding what gradient
descent is so basically the way to
minimize this is to compute the gradient
right so it's like you are in the
mountain you're lost in the mountain and
it's a very smooth mountain but there is
fog and it's night and you want to go to
the village and the valley and so the
best thing you can do is you you turn
around and you see which way is down and
you take a step down in the direction of
steepest descent okay so this search for
the direction that goes down that's
called computing a gradient or
technically a negative gradient okay
then you take a step down that's taking
a step down in the direction of negative
gradient and if you keep doing this and
your steps are small enough small enough
so that when you take a step you don't
jump to the other side of the mountain
then eventually you going to converge to
the valley if the value is convex which
means that if there is no kind of lake
no mountain lakes in the middle where
you know there's kind of a minimum and
you're going to get stuck in that
minimum the value might be lower but you
don't see it okay so that's why
convexity is important as well as a
concept but here is another concept
which is the concept of stochastic
gradient which I'm sure again a lot of
you have heard I'll come back to that in
more detail this the objective function
you're computing is an average over many
many samples and you can compute the
objective function in its gradient over
the entire training set by averaging the
the value of the entire training set but
it turns out it is more efficient to
just take one sample or a small group of
samples computing the error that this
sample makes thank you beating the
gradient of that error with respect to
the parameters and taking a step a small
step then a new sample comes in you're
going to get another
value for the error and another value
for the gradient which may be in a
different direction because it's a
different sample and take a step in that
direction
and if you keep doing this you're gonna
go down the the cost surface but in kind
of a noisy way there's gonna be a lot of
fluctuations so what is shown here is an
example of this this is Socastee
gradient applied to a very simple
problem with two dimensions we only have
two weights and it looks gonna say my
periodic because the examples are always
shown in the same order which is not
what you're supposed to do is to catch
the gradient but as you can see the path
is really erratic why do people use this
there's various reasons one reason is
that empirically it converges much much
faster particularly if you have a very
large training set and the other reason
is that you actually get better
generalization in the end so if you
measure the performance of the system on
a separate set that you you know I
assume you all know the concept of
training set and test set and validation
set but so if you test the performance
it's this time on a different set you
get generally better generalization if
you use the Kassie gradient and if you
actually use the real true gradient
descent
the problem is yes no it's worse so
computing the entire gradient of the
entire dataset it is computationally
infeasible I mean you can do it it's not
any more expensive than you know you'll
be less noisy will be slower so let me
tell you why I mean this is something
we're gonna talk about again when we
talk about optimization but let me tell
you I give you a training set with a
million training samples it's actually a
hundred repetitions of the same training
sample with 10,000 samples okay so my
actual sample is ten thousands training
samples and I represent it a hundred
times and I an eclaim that you know I
scramble it and I tell you here is my
training set with a million training
samples so if you do a full gradient
you're gonna compute the same values a
hundred times you're gonna spend a
hundred times more work than necessary
without knowing it okay so this only
works because of repetition but it also
also works in kind of more normal
situations in machine learning where you
have samples that are have a lot of
redundancy in them like very many
samples are very similar to each other
etc so there is any kind of coherence if
your system is capable of generalization
then that means sarcastic gradients
gonna be more efficient because it's
good if you don't use the Cassegrain
you're not gonna be able to take
advantage of that we don't see so that's
one case where noise is good for you
okay don't pay attention to the formula
don't let's don't get scared because
we're going to come back to this in more
details but why is back propagation
called back propagation and again this
is very informal it's basically a
practical application of chain rule so
you can think of a new head of the type
that I showed you earlier as a bunch of
modules that are stacked on top of each
other and you can think of this as
compositions of functions and you all
know the basic rule of calculus you know
how do you compute the derivative of a
function composed with another function
well the derivative of you know f
composed with G is the derivative of F
at the point of G of X multiplied by the
derivative of G at the point X right so
you get the product of the two
derivatives so this is the same thing
except that the function instead of
being scalar functions are vector
functions they get vectors on it as
input and the previous vectors as output
more generally actually they take
multi-dimensional arrays as input and
multi-dimensional arrays as output but
doesn't matter and basically what is the
generalization of this chain rule in the
case of kind of functional modules that
have multiple inputs multiple outputs
that you can view as functions right and
basically the it's the same world if you
kind of blindly apply them it's the same
rule as you applied for as you apply for
regular derivatives except he achieves
partial derivatives but you know
what you what you see in the end is that
if you want to compute the derivative of
the difference between the output you
want and yet what you get which is the
value of your objective function with
respect to any variable inside of the
network then you have to kind of back
you know propagate derivatives backwards
and kind of multiply things on the way
all right will be much more formal about
this next week for now you just know why
it's called that propagation and because
it applies to multiple layers okay so
the the pictures I showed earlier of
this neural net is nice but what if the
input is actually an image right so an
image even sort of a relatively low
resolution image is typically like you
know a few hundred pixels on the side
okay so let's say 256 by 256 to take a
random example okay a car image 250 see
that 56 so it's got 65,536 pixels times
3 because you have RG and B components
to it for you know you have three value
for each pixels and so that's you know
roughly two hundred thousand values okay
so your vector here is a vector with two
hundred thousand components if you have
a matrix is going to multiply this
vector this matrix is gonna have to have
two hundred thousand rows columns I'm
sorry
and depending on how many units you have
here in the first layer there's gonna be
a two hundred thousand by you know maybe
a large number that's a huge matrix
right even it's two hundred thousand by
one hundred thousand so you have a
compression in the first layer you know
that's that's already a lot of very very
large matrix billions so it's not really
practical to think of this as a full
matrix what you're gonna have to do if
you want to deal with things like images
is make some hypothesis about the
structure of this matrix so that it's
not a completely full matrix that you
know connects everything to everything
that would be impractical at least for a
lot of practical applications
so this is where inspiration from the
brain comes back there was some work
classic work in in neuroscience in the
1960s by the gentleman at the top here
hooba and Wiesel they actually want a
Nobel Prize for this in the in the 70s
but their workforce from the late 50s
early 60s and what they did was that
they poked electrode in electrodes in
the visual cortex of various animals you
know cats monkeys nice you know whatever
I think they're like cats a lot and they
try to figure out what the neurons in
the visual cortex were doing and what
they discovered was that so first of all
well this is a human brain but I mean
this charge is from much later but all
mammalian visual system is organized in
similar way you have signals coming in
to your eyes striking your retina you
have a few layers of neurons in your
retina in front of your photoreceptors
that kind of process the signal if you
want they cannot compress it because you
can't have you know the human eye as
something like a hundred million pixels
so it's like a hundred million pixel
camera megapixel camera but the problem
is you cannot have a hundred million
fibers coming out of your eye because
otherwise your optical nerve would be
this big and you wouldn't be able to
move your eyes so those neurons in front
of your retina do compression they don't
do JPEG compression but they do
compression so that the signal can be
compressed to 1 million fibers right you
have 1 million fibers coming out of each
of your eyes and that makes your you
know optical nerve about this big which
means you know you can carry the signal
and turn your eyes this is actually a
mistake that evolution made for
vertebrates invertebrates are not like
that in vertebrates have actually so
it's a big mistake because the wires
collecting the information from your
from your retina
because the neurons that process the
signal in front of your retina the wires
have to kind of it'll be in front of
your retina and so blocking part of the
view if you want and then they have to
punch a hole through your retina to get
through your brain so there's a blind
spot in your visual field because that's
where your optical nerve punches through
your retina so it's kind of ridiculous
if you have a camera like this to have
the wires coming out the front and then
you know dig a hole in your sensor to
get the wires back it's much better if
the wires come out the back right and
vertibird got that wrong in vertebra got
it right so you know like squid and
octopus actually have wires coming out
the back that much look here but anyway
so the signal goes from your your eyes
to a little piece of brain called the
lateral geniculate nucleus which is
under your brain actually and like at
the basis of it it does a little bit of
contrast normalization what about this
again you know she lectures and and then
that goes to the back of your brain
where the the primary visual cortex area
called v1 is it's called v1 in humans
and there's something called the ventral
hierarchy v1 v2 v4 i.t which is a bunch
of brain areas going from the back to
the side and in the if our temporal
cortex right here this is where object
categories are represented so when you
go around and you see your grandmother
you have a bunch of neurons firing that
represent your grandmother in this area
and it doesn't matter what your
grandmother is wearing you know what
what position she is in if there is
occlusion or whatever those neurons will
fire if you see your grandmother so they
sort of category level things and and
those things have been discovered by
experiments with patients that had to
have their skull open for a few weeks
and where you know people poked
electrode and had them watch movies and
realize this is known that turns on if
Jennifer Aniston is on the movie
and it only turns on for Jennifer
Aniston so with the idea that somehow
the visual context you know can do
pattern recognition and seems to have
this sort of hierarchical structure
multi-layer structure there's also the
idea that the visual process is
essentially a feed-forward process so
the process by which you recognize a
video object is very fast it takes about
180 second there's barely enough time
for the signal to go from your retina to
the info temporal cortex it takes about
it was it's a few millisecond delay is
per neuron that you have to go through
how do a millisecond you really have
time to for just you know a few spikes
to go through the entire system so
there's no time for like you know
recurrent connections and like you know
etc doesn't mean that there are no
record connections it's tons of them but
somehow fast recognition is done without
them so this is called the the
feed-forward ventral pathway and this
gentleman here Kuniko Kashima had the
idea of taking inspiration from Rizal in
the 70s and sort of build a neural net
model on the computer that had this idea
that first there were layers but also
the idea that human visual discovered
that individual neurons only react to a
small part of the visual field so they
poked electrode in neurons in v1 and
they realized that this neuron in v1
only reacts to motifs
that appear in a very small area in the
visual field and either no one next to
it will react to another area that's
next to the first one right so the
neurons seem to be organized in what's
called original topic way which means
that neighboring neurons react to
neighboring regions in the visual field
what they also realize is that the group
of neurons that all react to the same
area in the visual field and they seem
to turn on four edges at a particular
orientation so one neuron will turn on
for if it's receptive field has an edge
a vertical edge and then the one next to
it if the edges are all slanted and then
next to each of the edges
rotate it etc and so they had this
picture of v1 basically as oriented
orientation selectivity so neurons that
look at a local field and then react to
orientations and those groups of neurons
that react to multiple orientations are
replicated over the entire visual field
so this guy Fukushima I said well why
don't I build a neuron that that does
this I'm not going to you know
necessarily insist that my system
extracts oriented features but I'm gonna
use some sort of unsupervised learning
algorithm to to train it so it was not
training his system end to end he was
training it layer by layer in some sort
of unsupervised fashion which I'm not
going to go into the details of and then
he used another concept from so you see
the concept that those neurons were
replicated across the visual field and
then use another concept for our for
from urban visual code called complex
cells so complex selves are units that
pull the activities of a bunch of simple
cells which are those oriented oriented
orientation selective units and they
pull them in such a way that if an
orientation if an oriented edge is moved
a little bit it will activate different
simple cells but the complex cell since
it integrates the outputs from all those
simple cells will will stay activated
until the edge moves beyond its with
such a field solely those complex I'll
build a little bit of shift invariance
in the representation you can shift an
edge a little bit and it will not change
the activation the activity of one of
those complex cells so that's what we
now called completion and pulling in the
in the contest accomplished on nets and
that basically is what led me in the mid
80s or late eighties to come up with
commercial net so there are basically
networks where the connections are local
they are replicated across the visual
field and you you intersperse sort of
feature detection layers that detect
those focal features with pulling
operation we'll talk about this at
length in
in in three weeks so I'm going to go to
into every detail but but it has recycle
this idea from Google in visual and
Fukushima that I can get my pointer that
basically every neuron in one layer
computes a weighted sum of a small area
of the input and the weighted sum uses
those weights but those weights are
replicated across so every neuron in a
layer use the same set of weights okay
so this the idea of weighting or which
hearing so we're using back prop we were
able to Train neural nets like this to
recognize and regen digits this is back
from the late 80s early 90s
and this is me when I was about your age
maybe a little older I'm about thirty
this video and this is my phone number
when I was working at Bell Labs doesn't
work anymore it's a new jersey number
and I hit a key and this is neural net
running on the 386 PC with a special
accelerator card recognizing those
characters running a anyone that very
similar to the one I just show you the
animation of and this thing could you
know recognize characters of any style
including very strange styles including
even stranger styles and so this was
kind of new at the time because this was
back when character recognition or
pattern recognition in general we're
still in the model of we extract
features and then we turn your
classifier on top and this could
basically train the entire like learn
the entire task from end to end you know
basically the first few layers of that
neural net would would play the role of
a feature extractor but it was trained
from data the reason why we use
character recognition is because this
was this wasn't the only thing for which
we had data the only test for which
there was enough data was either
character recognition of speech
recognition speech recognition
experiments were somewhat successful but
not as much pretty quickly we realized
we could use those conditional Nets not
just to recognize individual characters
but to reckon as groups of characters so
multiple characters at a single time and
it's because of this conditional nature
of the network which I'll come back to
in three lectures that basically allowed
those systems to just you will be
applied to a large image and then they
will just turn on whatever they see in
their field of view whatever they see a
shape that they can't recognize so
basically if you have a large image you
you train a comes from that it has a
small input window and you swipe it over
the entire image and whenever it turns
on its mean is detected the object that
you trained it to detect so here the
system you know is capable of doing
simultaneous segmentation and
recognition you know back in the before
that people in pattern recognition would
have an explicit program that would
separate individual objects from their
background and from each other and then
send each individual object character
for example to a recognizer but with
this you could you can do both at the
same time you know if you're very valid
you don't have to build a new special
program for it so in particular it could
be applied to natural images for things
like like face phase detection
pedestrian detection things like this
right same thing train a commercial net
to distinguish between an image where
you have a face and individual you don't
have a face
join this with several thousand examples
and then take that window
swipe it over an image whenever it turns
on there is a face of course the face
could be bigger than the window so you
set sample the image you make it smaller
and you swipe your network again and
then make it smaller again swipe your
network again so now you can detect
faces regardless of size okay in
particular you can use this to drive
robots so this is things that were done
before deep running became popular okay
so this is an example where the the
network here is a commercial net it's
applied to the image coming from a
camera from a
you know running robot and it's trying
to classify every window of a small
window like 40 by 40 pixels or so even
nice as to whether the central pixel in
that window is on the ground
or is an obstacle right so whatever it
classifies as being on the ground is
green whatever it classifies as being an
obstacle is red or purple if it's on a
foot of the obstacle and that you can
sort of map this to a map which you see
at the top and then do planning in this
map to reach a particular goal and then
use this to navigate and so these are
two former PhD students right ahead cell
on the right chaos M&A on the Left or
annoying this poor robot pretty
confident the robot is not gonna break
their legs since they actually wrote the
code and trained it Pierce M&A is a
research scientist at Google brain in
California working on robotics right
ahead sell is head of robotics research
director of robotics research I did find
they do pretty well so a similar idea
can be used for what's called semantic
segmentation so semantic segmentation is
the idea that you can again with this
kind of sliding window approach you can
train a commercial net to classify the
central pixel using a window as a
context but here it's not just trying to
classify obstacle Foreman obstacles is
trying to classify something like 30
categories this is sit down
Washington place I think this is
Washington Square Park and it you know
it knows about roads and people and
plants and trees and whatever but it
finds you know desert in the middle of
Washington Square Park which is not is
there's no beach that I'm aware of
so it's not perfect at the time it was
state of the art though that was the
best system there was to do this kind of
semantic segmentation I was running
around giving talks like trying to
evangelize people about deep running
back then this was around 2010 so before
the kind of deep running revolution
and and when one person professor from
Israel was sitting in one of my my talks
and he's a theoretician but it was
really kind of transfixed by the
potential applications of this and he
was just about to take a sabbatical and
work for a company called Mobileye which
was a start-up in Israel at the time
working on autonomous driving and so a
couple of months after he heard my talk
he started working at mobileiron he's
totally mobile I people you know you
should try this completion on that stuff
this works really well and the engineers
they'll say yeah no we don't believe in
that stuff we were one method so he tree
he implemented it and tried it himself
beat the hell out of all the benchmarks
they had and all of a sudden the whole
company switch to using commercial
nights and they were the first company
to actually come up with a vision system
for cars that you know can keep a car in
a highway and can break if there is a
pedestrian or cyclist
crossing I'll come back to this in a
minute they were basically using this
technique semantic segmentation very
similar to the one I showed for the
robot before snow came on this was a guy
by the name of shy-shy leftwards you
have to be aware of the fact also that
back in the 80s people were really
interested in using in sort of
implementing special types of hardware
that could run on edge really fast and
these are kind of a few examples of
neural net chips that were actually
implemented I had to do with some of
them but they were implemented by people
working the same group as I was as I was
at Bell Labs in New Jersey so this was
kind of a hot topic in the 1980s and
then of course with the interesting
you're on that dying in the in the
mid-90s people weren't working on this
anymore until a few years ago now the
hottest topic in in chip design in the
ship industry is neural net accelerators
you go to any conference on computer
architecture you know chip like is sec
which is the big kind of solid-state
circuit conference half the talks are
about
neural net accelerators and I worked on
a few of those things
okay so then something happened as I
told you around 2010 13 15 in speech
recognition image recognition natural
language processing and it's and it's
continuing we're in the middle of it now
for other topics and what happened and
I'm really sad to say it didn't happen
in my lab but but with our friends we
started with yoshua bengio and geoff
hinton back in the early 2000 we knew
you know that that deep ronnie was
working really well
and we knew that the whole community was
making a mistake by dismissing neural
nets and he browning and so we didn't
use the term deep learning yet we
invented it a few years later so around
2003 or so 2004 we started kind of a
conspiracy if you want we got together
and we said we're just going to try to
kind of beat some records and some data
sets invent some new algorithms again
without always to train very large
neural nets so that will and will
collect very large data sets that we
will show the world that those things
really work
because nobody really believed it and
that really kind of succeeded beyond or
or wildest dreams in particular in 2012
geoff hinton had one student at xq Jeske
who spent a lot of time implementing
completion nets on GPUs which were kind
of new at the time they were not Italian
you but they're starting to become
really high-performance
so it was very good at sort of hacking
that and and then they were able to
train much larger neural nets
co-official nets anybody was able to do
before and so they used it to to train
on the image that data said the image
that dataset is a bunch of natural
photos and the system is supposed to
recognize the main objects in the photo
among 1000 different categories and the
training set had 1.3 million samples
which is kinda large so what they did
was build this really large
very deep completion net pretty much on
the same model as what we had before
implemented on GPUs and let it run for a
couple weeks
and with that they beat the performance
of best competing systems by a large
margin so this is the error rate on
image net going back to 2010 so 2010 it
was about 28 percent error top 5 so
basically you get an error if the
correct category is not in the top 5
among 1000 okay so it's kind of a mild
measure of error 2011 it was twenty five
point eight percent the the system that
was able to do this was actually very
very large it was sort of somewhat
conditional net like but it wasn't
trained I mean only the last layer was
trained and then Jeff and his team got
it down to sixteen point four percent
and then that was a watershed moment for
the computer vision community a lot of
people said okay you know now we know
that this thing works and the whole
community went from basically refusing
every paper that had neural nets in them
in 2011 and 2012 to refusing every paper
that does not have a condition detonate
in 2016 so now it's the new religion
right you can't get a paper you computer
vision conference unless you use common
eyes somehow and the error rate went
down really quickly you know people
found all kinds of really cute
architectural tricks that sort of made
those things work better and what you'd
see in there is that there was an
inflation of the number of layers so my
conditional Nets from the 90s had seven
layers or so and from the early 2000s
and then a next net had I don't know 12
then vgg the year afterward after that
at 19 google Annette had I don't know
how many because it's hard if you go how
you count and then the workhorse now of
object recognition the standard backbone
as people called them as 50 layers
it's called ResNet 50 but some you know
some networks have 100 layers or so so
I'll try to over a few years ago put
together this chart that shows where
each of those blob is a particular
network architecture and the x-axis is
the number of billions of operations you
need to do to compute the output okay
those things are really big billions of
connections the y-axis is the top one
accuracy on imagenet so it's not the
same measure of performance as the one I
showed you before so the best systems
are around 84 today and the size of the
of the blob is the memory occupancy so
the number of millions of floats that
you need to store to store the weight
the weight values now people are very
smart about compressing those things
like you know quantizing them and these
entire teams at Google Facebook and
various other places that only work on
optimizing those networks and
compressing the things so they can run
fast because to give you just a rough
idea the number of times Facebook for
example runs accomplished on that on its
servers per day is in the tens of
billions okay so there's a huge
incentive to optimizing the amount of
computation necessary for this so when
one reason why conditional nets are
being so successful is that they exploit
a property of natural data which is
compositionality so compositionality is
the property by which C is composed of
objects objects are composed of parts
parts are composed of sub parts sub
parts are really combinations of motifs
and motifs are combinations of contours
or edges right or textures and those are
just combinations of pixels okay so
there's this so-called compositional how
key that you know particularly
commissions of objects that one layer in
the hierarchy form objects at the next
layer and so if you can omim ik this
composition of hierarchy in the
architecture of the network and you let
it learn the appropriate combinations of
features at one layer that you know form
the the features of the next layer
that's really what deep running is okay
learning to represent the world and
exploit the structure of the world and
the well being the fact that there is
organization in the world because the
world is compositional a station by the
name of steward daemon who is at Brown
University said so he was kind of
playing on the famous Einstein quote
Einstein said the most incomprehensible
thing about the world is that the world
is is comprehensible like among all the
complicated things that the world you
know the world could be extremely
complicated so complicated that we have
no way of understanding it and it looks
like a conspiracy that we are able to
understand at least part of the world
and so Stewart Gaiman demon version of
this is that the world is compositional
or there is a God because you need
supernatural things to be able to
understand it if the world is not
compositional so this has led to
incredible progress in things like
computer vision as you know from you
know being able to unreliably I don't if
you know the tech people to being able
to generate masks for every object
accurate masks and then even so figure
out the pose and then do this in real
time on a mobile platform you know I
mean the progress has been sort of
nothing short of incredible
and most of those things are based on
two basic families of architectures this
sort of so-called one-pass object
detection recognition architectures
called retina net feature pyramid
network there's various names for it so
you net and then another type of masks
are CNN
both of them actually originated from
Facebook
or the people who origin it to them are
now at Facebook they sometimes came up
with it before they came to Facebook but
you know those things work really well
you know they can do things like like
that detect object that are partially
occluded and you know draw a mask of
every object so basically this is our
neuron that complex on that what the
input is an image but the output is also
an image in fact the output is a whole
bunch of images one per category and for
each category I put the mask of the
object from that category those things
can also do what's called instant
segmentation so if you have a whole
bunch of shapes it can tell you you know
not just that this region is cheap but
they actually pick out the individual
shapes and will tell them apart and it
will count the sheets right and fall
asleep that's what you're supposed to do
right you fall asleep you count chips
right and the cool thing about deep
learning is that a lot of the community
has embraced the whole concept that
research has to be done in the open so a
lot of the stuff that we're gonna be
talking about as you probably know in
the class is it's not just published but
it's you know published with code it's
not just code it's actually pre trained
models that you can just download and
run all open source or free to use so
that's really new I mean people didn't
use to do research this way particularly
in industry but even in academia people
weren't used to kind of distributing the
code but deep running has sort of
somehow the race that's kind of driven
people to kind of be more open about
research so there's a lot of
applications of all this as I said you
know submarine car this is actually a
video from mobile I and mobile I was
pretty early in this using accomplish on
that's for autonomous driving to the
point that in 2015 they had managed to
shoehorn accomplish on net on the chip
that they had designed for some other
purpose and they sold the license the
technology to Teslas or the first
self-driving Tesla's I mean start
driving or release a drug without
driving assistance right they can keep
in line on the highway
and change lane had this mobilized
system and and that's that's pretty cool
so that's a condition that it's a little
chip that is you know just behind the it
looks out the window and it's behind the
the rear view mirror since then this you
know four five years ago since then this
kind of technology has been very widely
deployed by a lot of different companies
mobilized till now it was bought by
Intel and they have like 70 or 80
percent of the market for those vision
systems but but there is a lot of
companies that and car manufacturers
that use those things so in fact in some
European countries every single card
comes at even low-end cars has
accomplished on that based vision
systems and they call this emergent
emergency sort of advanced emergency
braking system or automated emergency
braking system a EBS is deployed in
every car in France for example if uses
collisions about forty percent so not
every car on the roads have them yet
because you know people keep their cars
for a long time but but what that means
is that it saves lives so a very
positive application of deep running
another big category of applications of
course is medical imaging so this is a
it's probably the hardest topic in with
in radiology these days is how to use AI
which means commercial Nets for for
radiology this is lifted from a paper by
some of our colleagues here at NYU where
they analyzed MRI images so there's one
big advantage to commercial Nets is that
they don't need to look at the screen to
look at an MRI in particular to be able
to look at an MRI they don't have to
slice it into 2d images they can look at
the entire 3d value this is one property
that this thing uses it's a company it's
a 3d commercial net that looks at the
entire volume of an MRI image and then
produces you know it uses the very
similar technique for as I was showing
before for symmetric segmentation and it
produces
it basically turns on on the output
image wherever there is some you know
here a femur bone but you know it could
be uh so this is the kind of result it
produces it works better in 3d than in
2d slices or you can turn on with it
detects malignant tumor in mammograms
this is to DES not 3e and this you know
various other projects in medical
imaging that are going around okay lots
of applications in science and physics
bioinformatics you know whatever which
we'll come back to so okay so this is
virtual mysteries in deep learning
they're not complete mystery is because
people have someone who's standing over
list but they are mysteries in the sense
that we don't have like nice theory for
everything why do they work so well so
one big question the theoreticians were
asking many years ago when I was trying
to convince the world that deep longing
was a good idea was that they would tell
me why you can approximate any function
with just two layers what do you need
more and I'll come back to this in a
minute what's so special about
co-official nets I talked about the
compositionality of natural images or
natural data in general is true for
speech also and values of the signals
natural signals but it seems a little
contrived how is it that we can train
the system despite the fact that the
objective function we're minimizing is
very non convex we may have lots of
local minima this was a big criticism
that people were throwing at neural nets
people who'd never played with neural
nets were throwing out neural nets back
in the old days say like you know you
have no guarantee that your algorithm
will converge you know it's too scary
I'm not gonna use it and and the last
one is why is it that the way we train
neural nets breaks everything that every
textbook in statistics tell you every
textbook in statistics tells you if you
have n data points you shouldn't have
more than n parameters because you're
going to overfit like
you know you might regular eyes your
vision you might toilet prior but which
is equivalent but the what guarantee do
you have and with neural nets normal
nets are widely over privatized we train
neural nets with hundreds of millions of
parameters routinely they're using
production and the number of training
samples is nowhere near that how does
that work but it works ok
so things we can do with DP Ani today
you know we can have safer cars we can
have better medical analysis medical
image analysis systems we can have
pretty good language translation far
from perfect but useful stupid chat BOTS
you know very good information search
retrieval and filtering Google and
Facebook now nowadays are completely
built around deep learning you take deep
running out of them and they crumble and
you know lots of applications in energy
management and production and all kinds
of stuff manufacturing environmental
protection but we don't have really
intelligent machines we don't have
machines with common sense we don't have
intelligent personal assistants we don't
have you know smart chat BOTS we don't
have hassle robots you know I mean
there's a lot of things we don't know
how to do right which is why we still do
research ok so deep running is really
about running representations but really
we should know in advance what we what
representations are so I talked about
the traditional part of the model of
pattern recognition but um
representation is really about you know
you have your raw data you return it
into a form that is useful somehow
ideally you'd like to turn it into a
form that useful regardless of what you
want to do with it sort of a useful in a
general way ok and it's not entirely
clear what that means but at least you
want to turn it into a representation
that's useful for the task that you are
envisioning
and there's been a lot of ideas over the
decades on sort of general ways to
pre-process natural data in such a way
that you produce good representations of
it and I'm going to go through the
details of this laundry list but the
things like tallying the space doing
random projection so random projection
is actually kind of you know like a
monster that rears its head periodically
like every five years and you have to
whack it on the head every time he pops
up that was the idea behind the
perceptron so the first failure a
perceptron is a layer of random
projections what does that mean you a
run in projection is a random matrix
which you know has a smaller output
dimension and input dimension with some
sort of non-linearity at the end right
so think about a single layer neural net
with nonlinearities but the weights are
random so you can think of this as
random projections and a lot of people
are rediscovering that wheel
periodically claiming that it's great
because you don't have to do multi-layer
training and so I started with the
perceptron and then you know he came
back in the 60s and then he came back
again in the 1980s and then he came back
again and now he came back there's a
whole community most regions in Asia
because they call to layer neural nets
where the first layer is random they
call this extreme learning machines okay
and it's like it's ridiculous but it
exists they're not extreme I mean
they're extremely stupid but you know
right so I was mentioning the
compositionality of the world is you
know from pixels to edges to text on
motifs parts objects in text you have
characters word where groups clauses
sentences stories in speech it's the
same you have individual samples you
have you know spectral bands sound phone
phonemes words etc you always have this
kind of heart
okay so here are many attempts at
dismissing the whole idea of deep
learning okay
first first thing and this is things
that I've heard for decades okay from
mostly theoreticians but a lot of people
and you have to know about them because
they're going to come back in five years
when people say our deep longing sucks
why not use super virtual machines okay
so here is super vector machines here on
the top left support vector machine is a
and I'm sure many of you have heard by
kernel machines and super virtual
machines who knows what this is I mean
even if it's a rough idea what this is
okay a few hands who has no idea what
it's super fighter machine yet don't be
shy yeah yeah I mean it's okay if you
know okay like most people haven't
raised their hands for either okay come
on all the way up cool all right who has
no idea what it is don't be shy it's
okay all right
good right so here's the super veto
machine support vector machine is a two
layer neural net it's not really a
neuron that people don't like when it's
formulated this way but really you can
think of it this way it's a two layer
neural net where the first layer which
is symbolized by this function K here
each unit in the first value compares
the input vector X to one of the
training samples X eyes okay so you take
your training samples you sell you a
thousand of them so you have a thousand
excise from I equal one to a thousand
and you have some function kayla is
going to compare X and X I a good
example of a function to compare the two
is you take the dot product between X
and X I and you pass a result through
like exponential minus square or
something so you get a Gaussian response
as a function of the distance between X
and X I okay so it's a way of comparing
to two vectors doesn't matter what it is
and then you take those scores coming
out of this K function that compares the
input to every sample and you compute a
weighted sum of them and what you're
gonna learn other weights the alphas
okay so it's a two layer neural net in
which the second layer is trainable
and the first value is fixed
in a way you can think of the first
layer as being trained in an
unsupervised manner because it uses the
data from the training set but it only
uses the X's doesn't use the Y's it uses
the data in the stupidest way you can
imagine which is you store every X and
use every single X as the weight of a
neuron if you want okay that's why the
super activation is you can write a
thousand page books about the cute
mathematics behind that but the bottom
line is it's a two layer neural net
where the first layer is training a very
super stupid way unsupervised and the
second layer is just a linear classifier
so it's basically glorified tablet
matching because it basically compares
the input vector to all the all the
training samples and so it doesn't work
if you want to do like you know computer
vision with raw images if X is an image
and the X eyes are a million images from
imagenet first of all for every image
you're gonna have to compare it with a
million images or maybe a little less if
you're smart and how you train it that's
going to be very expensive and the kind
of comparison you're making is basically
what solves the problem the weighted sum
you're gonna get at the end is really
cherry on the cake I use the analogy too
often actually so you can approximate
you can you can have thorns that show
that you can approximate any function
you want as close as you want by tuning
the K function and the alphas and so he
was talk to authorities and they'll tell
you why do you need deep learning I can
approximate any function I want with a
kernel machine the number of terms in
that Sun can be very large and nobody
tells you what kernel function you can
use and so that doesn't solve the
problem you can use a two layer neural
net okay so this is the top right here
the first layer is a nonlinear function
f applied to the product of a matrix of
u0 by input vector and then the second
layer multiplied by the second matrix
and then passes it to another
non-linearity
okay so this composite composition of
two linear and non-linear operations
again you can show that under some
conditions you can approximate any
function you want with something like
this given that you have a large enough
vector in the middle okay so the
dimension of what comes out of the first
layer if it's high enough potentially
infinite you can approximate any
function you want as close as you want
by making this layer go to infinity so
again you talk to theoreticians and they
tell you why do you need layers I can
approximate anything I want with two
layers but there is an argument which is
it could be very very expensive to do it
in two layers and for some of you this
may sound familiar for most of you
probably not but let's say I want to
design a logic circuit okay so when you
design logic circuits right you have n
gates and or gates and or NAND gates
right you can do everything with just
Nan's
right negative ends and if you you can
show that any boolean function can be
written as a bunch of ORS on a bunch of
a bunch you know bunch of ands and then
an orang type of this that's called
disjointed normal form DNF so any
function can be written in two layers
the problem is that for most functions
the number of terms you need in the
middle is exponential in the size of the
input so for example if I give you n
bits and ask you construct a circuit
that tells me if the number of bits that
are on in the input string is even or
odd okay it's a simple boolean function
one or zero on the output the number of
gates that you need is essentially
exponential in the middle if you do it
in two layers if you allow yourself to
do it in log n layers where n is number
of input bits then it's linear okay so
you go from exponential complexity to
linear complexity if you allow yourself
to use multiple layers it's as if you
know when you write a program
I'll tell you write the program in such
a way that there is only two sequential
steps that are necessary to run your
program so basically your program has
two sequential instructions you can have
you can run as many instructions as you
want in your program but they have to
run in parallel most of them and you're
only allowed two sequential steps okay
and the kind of instructions you have
access to are things like you know in
your combination is nonlinear it is like
simple things right not like entire sub
programs so for most most problems the
number of intermediate values you're
going to have to compute in the first
step it's going to be exponential in the
size of the input there's only a tiny
number of problems for which you're
going to be able to get away with non
exponential number of interns but if you
allow your program to run multiple steps
sequentially then all of a sudden you
know we can be much simpler it will run
slower but it will take a lot less
memory it will take a lot less stuff
resources so people we design computers
our kids know this right you can design
for example a circuit that adds two
binary numbers and there is a very
simple way to do this which is that you
first you take the first two bits you
add them and then you propagate the
carry at the second bit the second pair
of bits you know taking the carry into
account that gives you the second bit of
result and then carry you know propagate
the carry and then you do this
sequentially right so problem with this
is that it takes the time that's
proportional to the size of the other
numbers that you're trying to add so
circuit designers have a way of
basically pre computing the carry this
code carry look-ahead
so that the number of steps necessary to
do an addition is actually not n it's
much less than that okay but that that's
at the expense of a huge increase in the
complexity of the circuit the the number
of like the area that it takes on the
chip
so this exchange between time and space
or between depth and and and and kind of
time is is known so what do we call deep
models so you know a two layer neuron
that when de has one in a layer I don't
call that deep even though technically
uses backdrop but hey you know it
doesn't really learn complex
representations so this is idea of
hierarchy in deep running as yen
definitely under D unless you learn
complicated kernels but then then others
GM's anymore so what are good features
what are good representations so here's
an example I like there is something
called the manifold hypothesis and it's
the fact that natural data so if I take
a picture of this room with you know a
camera with a thousand by thousand pixel
resolution that's 1 million pixels at 3
million values it leaves you can think
of it as a vector with three million
components among all the possible
vectors with three million components
how many of them correspond to what we
would call natural images we can tell
when we see a picture whether it's a
natural image or not we have a model in
our visual system that tells us this
looks like a real like you really image
and we can tell what it's not so the
number of combinations of pixels that
actually are things that we will that we
think of as natural images is a tiny
tiny tiny tiny tiny subset of the set of
all possible images is way more ways of
combining random pixels in nonsensical
images and there are ways of combining
pixels into things that look like
natural images so the manifold part is
this is that the set of things that you
know look natural to us live in a low
dimensional surface inside the high
dimensional ambient space and it will
example to convince yourself of this
imagine I take lots of pictures of a
person making faces right so the person
is in front of
white background her hair not moving and
she kind of move her head around and you
know big faces etc the set of all images
of that person so I take a long video of
that person the set of all images of
that person lives in a low dimensional
surface so a question I have for you is
what's the dimension of that surface
whatever magnitude okay any yes yeah
you've probably heard much feel before
but huh
okay so for whoever hasn't heard this
you have a shot another shot at an
answer okay
any guess no I'll be shy
and whatever like multiple proposals
anyone you get on down your laptop but
you know can point at you or something
okay
any idea yes no idea it's okay
you ready on you have you heard what he
said
linear what does that mean
it's a 1d space okay a one-dimensional
subspace okay any other proposal yeah
okay the images I'm taking our million
pixels okay so the ambient space is 3
million dimensions they don't change
no and the person can move the head you
know turn around things like this but
not really move the whole body I mean
you only see the face it's mostly
centered at thousand okay why
okay yeah that's a good guess keys to
motivation it's again the surface area
of the person right so it's bounded by
the number of pixels occupy other person
that's for sure that's so that's an
upper bound yes those pixels of course
I'm not gonna take all possible values
so that's a white upper ground any other
idea okay so basically the dimension of
that as as you said is bounded by the
number of muscles in the face of the
person right the number of degrees of
freedom that you observe in that person
is the number of muscles in the
interface the number of independent
removable muscles right so this 3
degrees of freedom due to the fact that
you can tilt your head this way that way
or that way that's three right there
then there is translation this way that
way will be this way and that way maybe
you up or down that's six and then the
number of muscles in your face right so
you can smile you can you know pout you
can do all kinds of stuff right and you
can do this you know in apparently why'd
you close one eye you can smile when
when one direction you know I mean so
whatever independent muscles you have no
counting the tongue because there's tons
of muscles in the tongue and that's
about fifty maybe a little more so
regardless it's less than 100 okay so
the surface locally if you want to
parameterize the surface occupied by all
those pictures move from one picture to
another it's a surface with less than
100 parameters that determine the
position of a point on that surface of
course it's a highly nonlinear surface
it's not like this beautiful calabi-yau
manifolds ear but but it's a it is a
surface nonetheless of course the answer
was in the side so you know
so what you'd like is an ideal feature
extractor to be able to disentangle the
explanatory factors of variation of what
you're observing right so the different
aspects of my face you know it's not
just I move my muscles and I move my
head around each of those is an
independent factor of variation again
also we move my glasses
you know the lighting could change
that's another set of you know variable
variables and what you'd like is a
representation that basically
individually represents each of those
factors of variations so if there is a
criterion to satisfy in learning good
representations it's that it's finding
independent explanatory factors of
variation of the data that you're
looking at and the bottom line is that
nobody has any idea how to do this okay
but that would be the ultimate goal of
representation only and we basically are
at the end okay I'll take two more
questions if there is any
yes okay so the question is is there
some sort of pre-processing like PC air
that will find those vectors yeah so PCI
will find those if the manifold is
linear so if you assume that the surface
occupied by all those examples or faces
is a plane then PCA will find the
dimension of that plane principal
component analysis right but no it's not
linear unfortunately right let me yeah
let me give you an example if you take
me and my older son that looks like me
and you place us to making the same face
in the same position the distance
between our images will be relatively
small even though we're not the same
person now if you take my face and my
face shifted by 20 pixels there's more
distance between me and myself shifted
than there is between me and my son okay
so what that means is that you know the
manifold of my face you know is some
complicated manifold in that space my
son is a very different manifold which
does not intersect mine yet these two
those two many folks are very close to
each other and they're closer to each
other than any two samples from my man
you follow into example from his
manifold so PC is not going to tell you
anything basically okay here is another
reason why that that surface is not is
not a plane you're looking at me right
now I imagine the manifold which is a
linear manifold one dimensional manifold
of me turning my head all the way 360
okay that manifold is topologically
identical to a circle it's not flat
can't be it can't be aligned so PCA is
not going to find it
okay I gotta blast off thanks to you
next week